---
layout: post
title:  MSU likely to continue with solar power longer than 25-year agreement
author: Ian Hoopingarner
date:   2017-08-01
category: fossil politics
keywords: venezuela and bonds
abstract:
---

Social media is filled with video and clickbait-y news about Venezuela, including now [this video](https://www.facebook.com/NowThisNews/videos/1544090949014357/) among others, but despite the hype the situation may be different than appears.  Though Venezuela has done disagreeable things like blocking Twitter and a Colombian television station, more are in favor of the government of President Nicolas Maduro than are protesting against it.  Some opposition protestors have faced police violence but the filming of the encounters for media purposes has reportedly been done in a misleading way.   An American documentarian remembers an armed opposition group saying “Don’t film what we do," only “film what they do to us.”  

The same journalist estimates that 80% of the violence in the country is coordinated by opposition groups who benefit from the news coverage of violence.  Police officers and soldiers have been attacked, and so have citizens supporting President Maduro.   That pro-government protests have been peaceful cannot clearly explain the violence at (but not of) pro-government rallies.  

There are clues to what is going on.  The protestors are a small group of people led by the owners of large monopoly corporations.  Not able to win at the ballot box, the opposition can tank the economy.  Is Venezuela in an economic war?  

An oil transport ship has been unable for a month to deliver one million barrels of Venezuelan heavy crude to a Louisiana refinery, [lacking of a letter of credit](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-venezuela-oil-cargo-exclusive-idUSKCN1AX2AA) from a bank.  Banks including Credit Suisse have stopped trading in Venezuelan bonds.  The buyer of the oil has not been able to find a bank to issue a letter of credit which is needed to guarantee payment to PDVSA (the company that manages Venezuela’s national oil business) after delivery.  In recent years Venezuela’s economy has used oil exports to barter for products, services and loans from other countries.  Recently about 40% of oil exports are given as repayment for loans.  U.S. refineries are of the few remaining cash buyers of Venezuelan oil.  Delaying those payments hurts Venezuela’s economy.  By some accounts, PDVSA’s 2016 financial report read like the company is struggling to stay afloat.  And [comments in the Wall Street press](https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2017-07-24/lucky-investors-and-venezuelan-bonds) this year give the impression that there is significant appetite for “restructuring” Venezuela’s debt.  This would be a downgrade of the country’s bonds: revenge for the banks and corporations that were bought out when past president Chavez restructured PDVSA in 2007 to give Venezualans majority control of PDVSA's oil production.

If the owners of large national and international corporations and banks have really put Venezuela into a state of economic war, then there should be some evidence on the ground connecting anti-government protestors to corporate interests.  And indeed, there is. [From a report by Lee Fang](https://theintercept.com/2017/08/09/atlas-network-alejandro-chafuen-libertarian-think-tank-latin-america-brazil/) on <theintercept.com> we know that one of the leaders of anti-government protests, Marina Corina Machado, is closely allied with a network of ideological free market think tanks known as the “Atlas Network”.  Machado is on video thanking the network and the opposition leader also has associations with the Caracas-based Atlas affiliate Cedice Libertad, a right-wing, pro-corporate think tank.  

Atlas has deep corporate connections.  It has received funding from oil corporations like ExxonMobile, financial institutions like MasterCard, and political money from the Kochs and the Templeton Foundations.  When a 2002 coup briefly paused the Chavez administration, Cediche Libertad’s director was one of the signers of the Carmona Decree, the document supporting a military takeover.  

Are Cedice and Atlas only reacting to some kind of grassroots groundswell?  FOIA documents and leaked cables reported in the press indicate that throughout Hugo Chavez’s presidency (as a spirit of progressive nationalism rose in Venezuela) the US State Department and the National Endowment for Democracy began funding Atlas think tanks in Venezuela with the goal of delegitimizing the Chavez administration.

Leaked diplomatic cables written in the mid-2000's show representatives of US foreign policy endorsing the political destabilization tactics of free-market NGOs like the Atlas Network.  In 2006 then-U.S. Ambassador to Venezuela William Brownfield sent a cable - later leaked - outlining a strategy for funding political nonprofits in Venezuela: “1. strengthening democratic institutions  2. penetrating Chavez’ political base  3. dividing Chavismo  4. protecting vital US business  5. isolating Chavez internationally."

The new Venezuelan Constituent Assembly has been maligned in the media.  Yet anyone could stand for election to the Assembly - which can amend the constitution - and [high voter turnout](https://venezuelanalysis.com/analysis/13282) was perceived as lending legitimacy to the July 30th election results.

Most reports in the press right now are sticking closely to the U.S. opposition stance, emphasizing hemispheric power politics rather than the financial manhandling of Venezuela's economy, but not all: a former banker and Royal Dutch Shell employee [predicts](http://thehill.com/blogs/pundits-blog/energy-environment/347384-as-venezuelans-continue-to-suffer-crisis-may-hit-you) that U.S.-based oil refiners like CITGO, a PDVSA subsidiary, configured to process Venezuelan heavy sour crudes and would need to change their operations in order to process crudes from elsewhere.  (This might not explain why the CITGO station on US-127 outside of St. Johns was pumping gas so slowly....)  This geopolitical dilemma is as much oil politics as a diplomatic crisis - the author, currently a professor at Rice University, writes:

>Unless Venezuelan exports are dramatically cut for a period of time because of domestic chaos, OPEC will still be challenged to maintain prices because of increased supplies from Iraq and Nigeria, as well as growing production in the U.S.
>This means that the greatest burden will fall on Venezuelans. A rupture of the political system in Caracas will create a need for a transition government in which rivals — unified in opposition to Maduro — can find common ground to address the myriad problems. They should welcome back Venezuelan oil industry professionals ousted by Chavez [and] *negotiate the right conceptual balance with multinationals* (emphasis mine)

A "right conceptual balance with multinationals" could have widely disparate meanings, especially when wondering what "multinationals" means in the first place.  In the Wall Street press report above, "multinationals", there New York financial institutions and their representatives, strategize about how to circumvent PDVSA creditors who would not submit to a downgrading of their bonds.  It suggests redirecting PDVSA's payment obligations to a new holding company, and simultaneously lowering the maturity, rates, and even the principal of PDVSA bonds.  The new holding company's bonds would not have to be be backed by oil revenue, thus would be a higher risk investment.  Bondholders could either stay in and collect their investment from the new holding company, or accept lower quality bonds that are still backed by oil revenue.   Two profitable choices for wealthy investors, but a raw deal elsewhere; especially for Venezuelan workers whose pension funds are invested in PDVSA.

A populist consciousness is rising globally as more and more begin to see how densely power and wealth has been compacted into the hands of a few.  But in the economic war raging in Venezuela, what Cediche and Atlas are doing is redirecting the vague sense of injustice many feel toward ideologically free-market goals.  I have seen many Facebok posts about a so-called uprising in Venezuela against President Maduro.  But if the anti-government protests were actually supported by a majority of Venezuelans, would they be so curated by a corporate think tank and organized as to benefit the investor class?
